All right.
We're finally at the end of this module, I know this has been a monster long module, but that's because
there's so much to cover in this topic.
And you know, we needed to kind of dig into the weeds before we could proceed with the rest of the
course because a lot of the other really awesome things that you can do in Java will kind of require
somewhat of a knowledge, particularly of interfaces.
And so I didn't want to proceed any further without introducing you to interfaces.
So I want to just do a quick review and summary of some of the key concepts that you've learned in this
module, starting with the concept of encapsulation.
You've heard me mention it a number of times.
I just want to review what that actually means, so we'll take a quick look.
So let's see if we jump over to the employee class and we jump up here to the top.
So what encapsulation basically is is it's our ability with object oriented programming, either to
combine data and behavior together to encapsulate related data and behaviors for that data together
in one unit.
And that unit is a class or an object, two sides of the same coin really, right?
And so here we see that we've got the class employee now.
This is an abstract class, and I'll review what that means.
But let's just take it as it is a class an employee and it models the concept of an employee and it
has a last name and a first name and a date of birth.
So that would be the data.
OK.
Now notice I'm skipping over these other fields.
I'm not considering these to be data because they're not directly part of the concept of an employee,
right?
People matter has nothing to do with the concept of an employee.
If you were to talk to a person who's familiar with jobs and working but not a programmer, they'd understand
perfectly well.
If you said, I've got a lot of employees who have last names, first names and dates of birth, they'd
understand that they wouldn't understand.
If you said your employees also have the people matter and rejects patterns and things of this sort.
So these are more like utility fields that are helping us to get our work done in this class, but I
don't consider them to actually be part of the data of this concept, OK?
If that distinction makes sense, anyway, so we've got these fields first name, last name, date of
birth, they are the data.
And then we've got behavior for this class, such as the ability to provide a salary to calculate or
figure out what what this employee's salary would be.
And then from there to even figure out what this employee's bonus would be, which depends on knowing
what the salary would be, OK?
These are behaviors that we have encapsulated into the employee class.
OK.
Also, the ability to represent the employee in a text form with the two string method, which we overrode.
So we are combining the data and the behavior together in a unit where it makes sense.
OK.
And that unit is the employee class in this case.
So that's encapsulation, then we also learned about inheritance.
So I'll show you an example of that.
Let's see.
We'll jump to the CEO class.
So we've got several classes that are extending the employee class, and by doing so, they are inheriting
potentially some of the employee classes, data and behaviors.
So one one more time, actually, if we jump back over here to employee notice that the data of employee,
particularly the last name, first name and date of birth are protected, and we learned long ago that
this just means it's almost private.
It's private to everybody, except for classes that extend employee, essentially.
Right?
And so jumping back over to CEO, the CEO inherits the first name, last name and date of birth fields
and any other fields that are not completely private in the employee class.
And so it's as if it's almost as if those fields were defined directly on the CEO class, even though
they happen not to be.
And then the same goes for the methods as well.
So you saw in the employee class that we had a method to calculate the bonus, right?
And it is public.
The CEO, analyst and programmer and manager all inherit that method for free.
So that's another key nicety of inheritance, right?
It basically allows us to reuse code in a fairly elegant way.
So these subclasses of the employee, CEO, analyst, manager and programmer, they're able to reuse
some of the code of the employee class.
All right.
And then we also learned about composition.
Composition is an awesome technique that can be used in a couple of ways.
If we want to allow a class such as RCO Class to internally make use of some other classes capabilities,
we can create an instance of that other class and then we can just call methods on it internally to
our own methods on the CEO class.
That's one way that we can use composition to get more functionality or more behaviors or capabilities
for for very little cost, right?
Because we're just calling some other classes capabilities, we're composing the CEO class from, in
this case, the flyer class, OK.
But in addition to that, we learned that we can use composition as a means of getting around the fact
that Java does not technically or directly support multiple inheritance.
Quick reminder Multiple inheritance is where a class such as CEO would be able to extend more than just
the employee class.
If we were to put a comma here and then we could say something like flyer or pilot or whatever, right?
As you've learned, Java does not allow us to inherit from multiple classes directly in this in this
way.
So one of the most useful ways that we can get around that supposed limitation is through composition.
We can compose our CEO class of other classes that have behavior and or data that we want to reuse,
as I'm doing here, creating an instance of the pilot, storing it in this flyer variable, right?
And then I can expose methods on the CEO class that essentially delegate down to methods of the pilot
class.
And if you'll recall, I was even able to generate those delegate methods automatically via the ADP.
So some of these methods, such as fly get hours flown, set hours flown is IFR, said IFR.
These are all delegate methods that the ID generated for us, and all they really are doing is just
delegating down to the pre-existing methods of the pilot class, which we're referencing via the variable
called flyer here.
OK.
So you also learned about delegation when we learned about composition, but even without delegation,
you can still use composition.
If we weren't trying to make the CEO appear to also be a pilot and we just wanted the CEO to make use
of some capabilities of the flyer, we could have done that.
So, for example, if the pilot class had some useful method on it, that helped us to calculate a salary
of a worker, somehow we might have called.
That method within our get salary method.
OK.
Just to help us to calculate the salary, if that had made sense, which in this case it does not.
OK, so that's another way that you can use composition that doesn't necessarily have anything to do
with inheritance.
All right.
And then maybe one final concept that I have not mentioned explicitly, but we've implemented it and
we've seen it is the concept called polymorphism, and this is definitely one of the most frequently
mentioned concepts of object oriented programming anyway.
So polymorphism is the concept that the caller of a class doesn't necessarily need to know specifically
what the type of that class is.
Let me show you what I mean.
So if we jump over to the main class here, you will see that we are creating an instance of an employee
using the Create employee method here and then we can take this instance.
Let's skip over all of this, which we added more recently and focus really just on this bit down here,
we can take that employee instance and then we can call to string and we can call, most importantly,
get salary.
OK, now what's cool is as a quick reminder, this get salary method behaves differently depending on
what type of employee we're using, right?
It returns different values if you are a programmer versus a manager versus a CEO versus an analyst,
right?
And we have specific types for all of those.
But this code here doesn't even know that, right?
From the perspective of this code, they all just look like an employee.
In fact, specifically, they all look like this interface.
I employee, OK, and all that this code needs to care about is that any object of type I employee has
a method called get salary and he can call that method.
OK, so he doesn't need to know the details of what specific subtype each of these employees is.
He doesn't care.
And so we're essentially able to hide the details of the type of a class this is polymorphism making
many shapes look like one essentially OK.
Super powerful.
And let me be a little more explicit now.
We took several lessons to arrive at this implementation, and so you would be forgiven if you might
have lost track of what the core benefit of using this polymorphic approach was.
Without using polymorphism, we would likely have used some kind of convoluted Ethel's block like this
to test.
If it's a programmer, then you should calculate the salary this way.
And that's where we started.
If you'll recall, when we first started this module, we created this code and we were explicitly calculating
the salaries all in line here.
Right?
That's why I started you off that way.
Now, as a quick reminder, if calculating a salary only required one or two lines of code, it might
very well make sense just to keep using and if else block or or switch.
I'm sorry, I think we actually use the switch, but same difference essentially, right?
NFLX block or switch to calculate that.
But imagine if calculating the salary was much more involved.
Perhaps it could require us to go make a call to a database or to a web service or or retrieve data
from who knows where.
Maybe you have to retrieve lots of different data and sift through it and do all sorts of complex things
such that if we were to try to do that inside of an if or a switch block, each of these bodies here
might be many, many, many lines of code, maybe a whole entire page of code just for one case.
OK.
Thereby making one class thousands of lines long.
And you typically want to avoid that.
We want to keep our classes typically short and sweet.
We also want to typically keep our methods short and sweet as well.
And so that would have been a very poor design if we had had to do that.
OK.
So that's arguably one of the primary benefits of using polymorphism in this way.
It's essentially to help prevent us from having to make a lot of convoluted, conditional checks that
you can generally call these false blocks or switches as conditions, right?
If it's this, then do this blah blah blah.
And as another reminder, the reason that we created this particular EFL's block here was because I
laid out a fictitious scenario in which we were pretending that we needed to output something different
for each type.
But we don't own the code anymore.
So if you don't have access to the code in these subtypes, programmer manager, analysts, CEO, this
might be what you would have to do.
OK, so this is kind of showing you the world without your ability to make good use of object orientation
and specifically polymorphism.
All right.
And obviously, I already eluded to the fact that we learned about interfaces and abstract classes as
well.
So an interface could be thought of as a gutted out class that simply states methods that need to be
implemented somewhere else.
Right?
That need to be implemented by the classes that implement that interface.
OK.
So it's really just a way it's almost like a mask, if you will.
It's a way to put a mask over a class so that you can make that class look like something else.
OK.
So again, over here, we're going to make all of the objects that come out of this create employee
method look like I employee.
Now, mind you, you can't just take any object and make it look like any interface.
That object has to implement that interface in order to be able to refer to it by that interface.
And when we do so, you now mask any methods that that object might have had that are not defined on
the interface itself.
OK, so the interface kind of does this masking thing.
All right.
OK.
And then we also learned about abstract classes, which are sort of in between interfaces and concrete
classes.
So we'll take another quick look at our abstract class of employee.
We define it as abstract by simply putting the word abstract in front of the word class.
And what an abstract class allows us to do is to define some methods as being abstract while defining
other methods if we want as being concrete.
OK.
And so we can mix and match.
The nice thing here is that we can then use the template pattern if we want to and have our concrete
methods, which can be inherited by subclasses.
They can refer to the abstract methods, even though the abstract method at this point may not have
been implemented yet by any subclass.
So this is a really cool little pattern.
So here we've got the get bonus method that's saying the bonus will be calculated by getting the salary
and then multiplying that times 10 percent.
And you see that here, even though we don't really know the details at the time of writing this code
of how the salary will be calculated and we don't need to know that right.
That's an implementation detail that we can delay for a later period of time, such as when we decide
to go implement a subclass of this abstract class.
And that's kind of the beauty, right?
You don't have to implement all the details right now.
Some details can be implemented later down the road.
One other key point I want to mention here I might have mentioned it very briefly in passing, but I
want to be a little more explicit about it is something I'm reminded of in this code here.
As you can see, we created this employee instance and defined it to be the same type as the Interface
I employee.
And then we use it down here via, you know, in a polymorphic way.
Right?
So this just reminds me to mention an important concept in object orientation, unless you have a specific
reason not to do so.
You should generally store instances of your objects in the most generic data type that allows you to
get your work done.
What do I mean by that?
Well, looking at this code here, if I had chosen to store this variable in a data type of programmer,
for example, obviously in that case I'd be limiting what I could do down here to only what can be done
on a programmer itself.
So here where we're creating employees other data types, well, actually, this would have given me
an error.
For one thing, because the create employee method currently is defined to return and I employee anyway.
But in general, I'd be limiting what methods I could call to those that are only of type programmer.
So the main thing I want to point out here is that by using one of the most generic data types I can
for creating an employee and storing it in this case, the interface I employee, I allow myself to
be free to add new types of employees in the future without breaking any of this code, right?
So as long as my new types of employees adhere to the I employee interface, that is as long as they
implement the I employee interface, none of this code here, perhaps excluding this, you know, this
example of a world where you don't have polymorphism.
In fact, let me go ahead and just delete that now so as to not confuse you any further.
Right?
So this code would not need to change at all, even if we were to add five more types of employee in
the future.
Right.
And that's again, one of the beauties of object orientation and polymorphism.
So the key point, though, is you should prefer, whenever possible, to store your instances of objects
in the most generic data type.
You can get away with typically.
OK.
So be as generic and unspecific as you can.
In this case, the only thing we knew we needed to call were to string and get salary.
We have access to both of those from variables of type I employee.
So why create anything more specific than that, right?
And by keeping it loose and keeping it fairly generic, we keep our code very flexible and capable of
being updated with minimal changes.
All right.
So this was just a quick little summary of a lot of the key concepts that we've learned.
I would have been remiss if I had allowed you to end this module, and I didn't particularly teach you
the term polymorphism super important if and when you ever go in for a job interview and people know
that this is your first programming job and they know that, you know, Java, there's a fair chance
you're going to be asked What is polymorphism right?
So now you know what that is.
All right.
I hope you got a lot out of this module.
It was an extremely important module, but hopefully it got everything that I was trying to convey to
you in this.
And with that, I will see you in the next one.